feat: Added multiline attribute to string input element (#9438)
PrairieLearn/PrairieLearn: docs/elements.md

| `size`                    | integer             | 35       | Width of the input box.                                                                                                                                                   |
| `show-help-text`          | boolean             | true     | Show the question mark at the end of the input displaying required input parameters.                                                                                      |
| `multiline`               | boolean             | false    | Whether or not not to allow for multiline input using a `textarea` display.                                                                                               |

#### Using multiline inputs

Note that, in multiline inputs, it can be hard to distinguish between inputs with or without a terminating line break (i.e., an additional "Enter" at the end of the input). Because of that, you are strongly encouraged to leave the default setting of `remove-leading-trailing="true"` unchanged when using multiline inputs.

> Additionally, multiline inputs will have their line breaks simplified to a single LF (a single `"\n"` in Python) from CR LF (`"\r\n"` in Python). Note that this is different from the behavior of a standard `textarea` HTML element.

Author: Do you mean multiline inputs? I can't find the phrase "multiple inputs" in this document.

> Additionally, multiline inputs will have their line breaks simplified to a single LF (a single `"\n"` in Python) from CR LF (`"\r\n"` in Python). Note that this is different from the behavior of a standard `textarea` HTML element.

Reviewer: 🤦 reading is hard. sorry.

Followup: can we make this more precise? I think what this is saying is that `\r\n` is replaced with `\n`, but maybe we can say that differently, like "In a multline input, any `\r\n` line breaks will be normalized to `\n`.

> Additionally, multiline inputs will have their line breaks simplified to a single LF (a single `"\n"` in Python) from CR LF (`"\r\n"` in Python). Note that this is different from the behavior of a standard `textarea` HTML element.

Author: Yes, I think that increased detail is helpful.

> Additionally, multiline inputs will have their line breaks simplified to a single LF (a single `"\n"` in Python) from CR LF (`"\r\n"` in Python). Note that this is different from the behavior of a standard `textarea` HTML element.

Author: Reworded discussion here: https://github.com/PrairieLearn/PrairieLearn/pull/9438/commits/7cf4747c7a558d3012f7c664b1bd483e6bb00915

| `size`                    | integer             | 35       | Width of the input box.                                                                                                                                                   |
| `show-help-text`          | boolean             | true     | Show the question mark at the end of the input displaying required input parameters.                                                                                      |
| `multiline`               | boolean             | false    | Whether or not to allow the input to include line breaks.                                                                                                                 |
| `escape-unicode`          | boolean             | true     | Whether or not to escape unprintable unicode characters. Default is `false` if `multiline` is enabled.                                                                    |

#### Using multiline inputs

> Note that, in multiline inputs, it can be hard to distinguish between inputs with or without a terminating line break (i.e., an additional "Enter" at the end of the input). Because of that, you are strongly encouraged to use `remove-leading-trailing="true"` when using multiline inputs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that, in multiline inputs, it can be hard to distinguish between inputs with or without a terminating line break (i.e., an additional "Enter" at the end of the input). Because of that, you are strongly encouraged to leave the default setting of `remove-leading-trailing="true"` unchanged when using multiline inputs.
```

| `normalize-to-ascii`      | boolean             | false    | Whether non-English characters (accents, non-latin alphabets, fancy quotes) should be normalized to equivalent English characters before submitting the file for grading. |
| `placeholder`             | text                | None     | Hint displayed inside the input box describing the expected type of input.                                                                                                |
| `size`                    | integer             | 35       | Width of the input box.                                                                                                                                                   |
| `show-help-text`          | boolean             | true     | Show the question mark at the end of the input displaying required input parameters.                                                                                      |
| `multiline`               | boolean             | false    | Whether or not to to allow the input to include line breaks.                                                                                                              |

> #### Details
> 
> The student answer will use a single `\n` as a newline character, even if `multiline` is not enabled. To avoid issues with newlines, they can be ignored by enabling `remove-spaces`. Keep in mind that longer strings may not display cleanly on the submitted or correct answer panels, so it may be best to hide these panels if students are submitting longer strings.

Reviewer 3: This is more specific to technical implementation than useful information for instructors. I don't think mentioning the `\n` here is necessary, what is more important is to ensure instructors are aware of issues with terminating line breaks.

About hiding submitted/correct answers, I don't think that's the solution. I'll discuss that in a separate comment.

Here is a suggestion.

```suggestion
#### Using multiline inputs

Note that, in multiline inputs, it can be hard to distinguish between inputs with or without a terminating line break (i.e., an additional "Enter" at the end of the input). Because of that, you are strongly encouraged to use `remove-leading-trailing="true"` when using multiline inputs.
```

About `remove-spaces`: this might require a bit of thought. Should line breaks be counted as spaces? This may depend on context, but I would assume that the default should be no. In that case, should the leading/trailing handling be different in this consideration?

Author: Line breaks are already being counted as spaces (the `remove-spaces` attribute gets rid of all whitespace).

> The student answer will use a single `\n` as a newline character, even if `multiline` is not enabled. To avoid issues with newlines, they can be ignored by enabling `remove-spaces`. Keep in mind that longer strings may not display cleanly on the submitted or correct answer panels, so it may be best to hide these panels if students are submitting longer strings.

Reviewer 2: Does this mean that student answers are always terminated by `\n`, even if they are not using `multiline` mode? Or is this only if there are actually newlines in the single-line string?

Author: I'm actually not sure, I'm having difficulty replicating this behavior now. I think the main thing was that, with multiline enabled, it was easy to insert trailing newlines in the answer.

Author: Resolving since I think this language is outdated.

| `ignore-case`             | boolean             | false    | Whether or not to enforce case sensitivity (e.g. "hello" != "HELLO").                                                                                                     |
| `normalize-to-ascii`      | boolean             | false    | Whether non-English characters (accents, non-latin alphabets, fancy quotes) should be normalized to equivalent English characters before submitting the file for grading. |
| `placeholder`             | text                | None     | Hint displayed inside the input box describing the expected type of input.                                                                                                |
| `size`                    | integer             | 35       | Width of the input box.                                                                                                                                                   |
| `show-help-text`          | boolean             | true     | Show the question mark at the end of the input displaying required input parameters.                                                                                      |

> | `multiline`               | boolean             | false    | Whether or not to use a multiline input for this element.                                                                                                                 |

Reviewer 3: Nit, I think this should be less technical and more practical (reformatting may be needed, I didn't count the spaces):
```suggestion
| `multiline`               | boolean             | false    | Whether or not to to allow the input to include line breaks.                                                                                                                 |
```

| `placeholder`             | text                | None     | Hint displayed inside the input box describing the expected type of input.                                                                                                |
| `size`                    | integer             | 35       | Width of the input box.                                                                                                                                                   |
| `show-help-text`          | boolean             | true     | Show the question mark at the end of the input displaying required input parameters.                                                                                      |
| `multiline`               | boolean             | false    | Whether or not to allow the input to include line breaks.                                                                                                                 |

> | `escape-unicode`          | boolean             | true     | Whether or not to escape unprintable unicode characters. Default is `false` if `multiline` is enabled.                                                                    |

Reviewer 2: Could we default this to `true` even for multiline input or is there a problem with CR/LF characters?

It [sounds like](https://stackoverflow.com/a/14217315) `textarea` elements will always send us `CR+LF` line endings, so I think it should work to just not escape the `CR+LF` pair on the end of each line, but to escape everything else within the line (including any singleton `CR` or `LF` characters that aren't part of a `CR+LF` pair).

Reviewer 3: Personally I'm in favour of normalizing both correct answer (in prepare) and submitted answer (in parse) to `LF`, mostly because I believe many instructors will likely use `\n` in their setting of the correct answer, and trying to explain this difference may be something we want to avoid. In essence, replace `/\r?\n/` (or, if we're feeling generous, `/\\s*\n/`) with `\n` in parse. In either case, I agree that the line break should not be escaped, whether or not we keep the `CR`.

Author: > Personally I'm in favour of normalizing both correct answer (in prepare) and submitted answer (in parse) to `LF`, mostly because I believe many instructors will likely use `\n` in their setting of the correct answer, and trying to explain this difference may be something we want to avoid. In essence, replace `/\r?\n/` (or, if we're feeling generous, `/\\s*\n/`) with `\n` in parse.

I'm mostly in agreement with this, and the current behavior in this PR is to normalize the submitted answer to `LF` (https://github.com/PrairieLearn/PrairieLearn/pull/9438/files#diff-e3c5943c659a94abbfdbf1f52defa85320b1271a71523abfb1a4b54f17131a9aR254). It's straightforward enough to add this behavior to the correct answer used in grade as well (doing this in grade rather than parse is consistent with how other input transformations are handled).

> Could we default this to true even for multiline input or is there a problem with CR/LF characters?

I'm actually in favor of keeping the current behavior of an all-or-nothing escaping of the `Cc` (unicode control) characters (so by default, no escaping for multiline input). The reason for this is that the point of the multiline input is to faithfully display the input string with control characters (so newlines skip to the next line, tabs indent, etc.). In fact, I think newlines are the most common examples of the control characters, and it's much less confusing than with the one-line string input if these are present (looking back, I think one of the main reasons for the previous escaping behavior was probably just to avoid displaying the student output on multiple lines).

To be clear, outside of the `Cc` and `Cf` character codes, other weird unicode stuff is handled by `normalize-to-ascii` option, so changing the escaping of control characters won't introduce weird issues outside of changing the display.

Reviewer 2: > I'm mostly in agreement with this, and the current behavior in this PR is to normalize the submitted answer to `LF` (https://github.com/PrairieLearn/PrairieLearn/pull/9438/files#diff-e3c5943c659a94abbfdbf1f52defa85320b1271a71523abfb1a4b54f17131a9aR254). It's straightforward enough to add this behavior to the correct answer used in grade as well (doing this in grade rather than parse is consistent with how other input transformations are handled).

Sounds great!

Should we also normalize singleton `\r` characters (not followed by an `\n`) to `\n`?

> I'm actually in favor of keeping the current behavior of an all-or-nothing escaping of the `Cc` (unicode control) characters (so by default, no escaping for multiline input). The reason for this is that the point of the multiline input is to faithfully display the input string with control characters (so newlines skip to the next line, tabs indent, etc.). In fact, I think newlines are the most common examples of the control characters, and it's much less confusing than with the one-line string input if these are present (looking back, I think one of the main reasons for the previous escaping behavior was probably just to avoid displaying the student output on multiple lines).
> 
> To be clear, outside of the `Cc` and `Cf` character codes, other weird unicode stuff is handled by `normalize-to-ascii` option, so changing the escaping of control characters won't introduce weird issues outside of changing the display.

I think there are two main problems we face:
1. How do we help instructors write questions that don't suffer from unexpected grading behavior caused by students inputting unexpected characters?
2. How do we help instructors (and students) see exactly what was input, especially in cases where the submission was graded as incorrect but it looks visually correct?

For problem (1) I think that normalizing CR+LF and CR to LF is probably sufficient, as you say. For (2), the `normalize-to-ascii` option handles this, but it defaults to false and so is of no use post hoc and there are also legitimate reasons for not using it. To solve (2), some ideas are:
1. Escape unicode Cc and Cf sets in multiline mode, except for TAB and LF (assuming we normalize CR to LF). Of course this would only be a partial solution.
2. Add some other way for instructors (and students) to see exactly what was input. For example, this could be a "?" button next to the input in the submitted answer that shows a popover with input displayed with every non-printable-ascii (that is, everything outside of 0x20 to 0x7E) rendered as `<U+....>`.

What do you think? We could defer this to a later PR, but I do think it becomes more important with multiline input because students are more likely to be copy/pasting blocks of text that may well contain characters that the question author did not expect.

Reviewer 2: I agree with you that solution (2) is better than (1), both because it builds consistent expectations across elements and also because it allows us to escape all unicode characters, not just Cc and Cf. As you say, option (1) adds complexity without fully solving the problem.

Implementing option (2) in a followup PR would be great, but I'm also on board with squeezing it into this PR if it's small.

Author: Yes, the `pl-symbolic-input` doesn't have any special behavior for unicode escaping in its display of the raw answer. I agree standardizing the display in this case would be valuable. This will require a little more thought (and namely, a second PR), but I think we could do this with pretty low overhead overall by sharing the logic. As long as what's going on here currently is semi-reasonable (I'd argue it's probably an improvement over the previous behavior), I should be able to handle this in a short follow-up.

Author: Made an issue for this follow-up: https://github.com/PrairieLearn/PrairieLearn/issues/9717

Given the scope, it might not be a super fast follow-up (I would be hesitant to deploy unifying logic like this before summer), but discussed during the meeting and major changes to the escaping behavior are a little orthogonal to the point of this PR.

I think the bar for review on the present PR should be just be adding the multiline behavior and making it no-more-confusing than the present escaping, while compatible with the later planned changes. For this, I will remove the element attribute for escaping on the display (since ultimately, we want to display with a popover that shows all the information instead of adding an attribute), and add a popover with a barebones escaping of the string inputted by the student (using the same visual language as the raw display on symbolic input). We can defer larger changes / discussion to the linked issue.

Author: Initial changes in this direction here, still have to work out the kinks: https://github.com/PrairieLearn/PrairieLearn/pull/9438/commits/1e734b640bf5156b22cea944515714533477b968

Reviewer 2: I like your proposed "no-more-confusing-than-present" strategy.
